marA locus causes decreased expression of OmpF porin in multiple-antibiotic-resistant (Mar) mutants of Escherichia coli. 
Mar (multiple antibiotic resistant) mutants of Escherichia coli express chromosomally mediated resistance to a variety of structurally unrelated hydrophilic and hydrophobic antibiotics. Insertion of transposon Tn5 into the marA locus at min 34.05 on the chromosome completely reverses the Mar phenotype (A.M. George and S.B. Levy, J Bacteriol 155:531-540, 1983). We found that among changes in the outer membrane of Mar mutants, porin OmpF was greatly reduced, although Mar mutants were more resistant than cells lacking only OmpF. Transduction of the marA region from a Mar strain, but not a wild-type strain, led to loss of OmpF. P1 transduction of marA::Tn5 into a Mar mutant partially restored OmpF levels. Therefore, OmpF reduction required a mutation in the marA region. Mar mutants of an ompF-lacZ operon fusion strain expressed 50 to 75% of the beta-galactosidase activity of the isogenic non-Mar parental strain, while Mar mutants of a protein fusion strain expressed less than 10% of the enzyme activity in the non-Mar strain. These changes were completely reversed by insertion of marA::Tn5. The responsiveness of OmpF-LacZ to osmolarity and temperature changes was similar in Mar and wild-type strains. Although some transcriptional control may have been present, OmpF reduction appeared to occur primarily by a posttranscriptional mechanism. The steady-state levels of ompF mRNA were twofold lower and the mRNA was five times less stable in the Mar mutant than in the wild-type strain. Expression of micF, which lowers ompF mRNA levels, was elevated in Mar strains, as revealed by a micF-lacZ fusion. Studies with strains deleted for the micF locus showed that the marA-dependent reduction of OmpF required an intact micF locus. Our findings suggest that the marA locus directly or indirectly increases micF expression, causing a posttranscriptional decrease in ompF mRNA and reduced amounts of OmpF. 